There are several ways that you can modify the internal activations of a model during the forward pass.
Fortunately, it's actually fairly easy to do, and the broad strokes of the code implementations are
basically the same as storing the activations using hooks, which is what you've been doing all throughout
the previous several sections.
So before telling you about the specific demos that I will show, I would like to explain the general
concept of modifying activations in a PyTorch model.
This code obviously looks very familiar.
It's a hook function, exactly like what you've been using to store the activations for later analysis,
and that is actually optional.
Step two here.
What's different here is to take the output of this layer Air and change it somehow.
And how exactly do you change it and what should you change it to?
Well, that's obviously what I'm going to teach you in the rest of this part of the course.
But generally you would replace parts of the output with zeros, with random numbers like noise, or
with the activations that were measured from some other token or another model.
But here's the really crucial part.
You can see that this hook function now has a return statement at the end that is new.
All of the other hook functions that we have used so far in this course did not actually have this output
return statement in the hook function.
The outer function of course, did have an output just like it has here that returns the function itself
that we define in here.
But when you are just implanting a hook to get the activations, but you don't want to change anything,
then you do not need a return line inside the hook function itself.
Okay, but now we actually do want to modify the output, not just measure it.
So now we need this return line here at the end of the hook function.
Now what PyTorch will do is try to match the size of this tensor to what it would otherwise have as
an output of this layer.
If the sizes match, then this tensor here will overwrite the output tensor that otherwise would have
been calculated in the model.
And if the sizes do not match well, check your code carefully when you're writing it so that you do
not end up in that situation.
It's just going to cause errors and problems that might be difficult to isolate.
Anyway, that is the simple idea of manipulating the activations during a forward pass.
Create a hook function, change the output and return that output so that it replaces whatever the output
otherwise would be.
In this video, I will show you six demos of how to manipulate the activations of the model when it's
processing tokens.
The first demo I'll show actually will not work.
It's going to give us an error, but that will be a great learning opportunity about some quirks of
PyTorch.
And then the next five demos will be about just various ways that you can implement activation editing
using a forward hook.
I'll give a brief overview of these demos here on this slide, and then we'll have a closer look in
code.
Here you can see I'm creating a hook function.
Now this initially looks like the same hook functions that you've seen in other videos to grab the activations.
That's all fine.
So what I do here is hook into an attention layer, and then grab the qkv matrix and then split it into
three matrices.
Here my goal is to zero out the Q activations for the fifth token and the first ten dimensions.
And then I concatenate them back into one q matrix.
Store that matrix so I can later analyze it, and then return that matrix, or replace it with the original
qkv matrix from this layer.
Now this code seems like it should work, but the problem here is actually that the tensor Q is still
part of the variable output.
It's just a different view or slice of the output matrix.
At least that's how PyTorch represents it internally.
So PyTorch doesn't actually like this because it thinks that we are trying to modify the output matrix
from a view or a slice, and not just this one piece of it.
So that causes an error.
To be honest, it's a little bit annoying that it works that way, but that's just how it is.
So then we will move on to the second demo, which actually does work.
Now here I'm not slicing or viewing the matrix, I'm just modifying the matrix directly.
Remember that because this is an attention block, this output matrix is the qkv vectors all concatenated.
And because q come first, I'm zeroing out the first ten vectors of the fifth token for q.
So that's not so confusing here, although it can get a little tricky with the indexing if you want
to access the v or the k vectors because those come later after q.
Okay.
And then here I'm storing the output and then again returning that output.
So it replaces what would otherwise be the calculation of the attention block here.
After implanting this hook and doing a forward pass I grab the activations.
And now you see that this row here has all zeros exactly as I specified in demo three.
I will show you another way to get demo one to work.
So I'm still splitting up the Q tensor over here into three separate matrices.
But then here I'm making a copy or a clone of the Q matrix.
And then I modify that copy.
And then I can concatenate that back along with the original k and v.
And then I store that and output that q matrix.
And this one PyTorch is actually happy to let me modify.
So this demo will work.
Then in demo four I will show you how to manipulate only one layer while storing the activations from
all the other layers without changing them.
This would be for an experiment in which you want to measure the attention vectors from all transformer
blocks throughout the entire model, but you don't want to manipulate all of the attention blocks,
you just want to modify the activations in one layer.
And here you can see I'm doing that in layer three.
So you can see I'm doing a lot of hard coding in these demos.
That's fine for getting started to explain the mechanisms in a very simple way.
Although yeah, hard coding like this is obviously not the best way to write code or to run experiments.
I will get back to that in a moment.
But first here you can see that I have successfully cached the activations from all the layers, but
I've zeroed out only the activations from the fourth layer, which corresponds to index three.
Now, in all of the demos so far, I have explicitly zeroed out the activations by putting zero directly
into the hook function.
That's fine.
If we ever only ever want to change the activations to zero.
But zero is not a very realistic value for the internals of a language model.
And that brings me to demo five, where I'm going to create a separate variable outside of the hook
function.
So a global variable and that defines the numerical data that you want to inject into the model.
So that's what you see here I call that Q to replace.
And here I've set it to be zeros again.
But of course in the future we will set this to be other vectors that we want.
Now there's still quite a bit of hard coding in here in terms of the length of the vector and the indices
to target and so on.
And that brings me to the final demo in this video, where I will create a dictionary with the keys
corresponding to the layer number that you want to replace, and the values corresponding to the numbers
that you want to put in place of the data.
So you can see here that inside the hook function, that the activations will be stored from all of
the layers, but they only get changed if the particular layer that we're that is currently being processed
is one of the keys of this dictionary.
And then, yeah, this code is still always going to start replacing data from the very first index.
And for token index four.
But at least it's dynamic enough to replace the vectors according to whatever data you put into this
dictionary.
Needless to say, this dictionary is something you can continue modifying and adapting as you are running.
Experiments and explorations.
So here you see a bit of code where I show how to use this.
So here I'm removing the key for number eight and then adding another key to change here to the 12th
block.
So index 11.
And then here I'm printing out the activations.
You don't actually see what's going on all the way out till 11.
But I will show you that when we switch to code.
So there's a lot more to learn about manipulating activation values in a model.
I will have more things to say in the code demo, and a lot more things to say in the videos in the
rest of this part of the course.
But this really is the basic idea.
It's not so difficult.
I'm not going to be visualizing data or really working with data at all, so we just need to import
the PyTorch libraries and of course the model.
Again, GPT two small is fine.
We just want to test some things.
Here are some tokens to process just so we have some data to push through the model.
I wish coffee would taste like chocolate.
I suppose technically you could put chocolate into coffee, but whatever.
Okay.
And, uh.
Yeah.
Okay, so let's go through demo one now.
So here, as I explained in the slides a moment ago, all of this code seems like it should work.
So we split the output of the attention block into the three matrices.
And then I'm zeroing out some of them, and then I recombine them.
So I concatenate them back together.
The size of this matrix is the same as the size of this matrix.
So the output of the this block, and literally every single element in this tensor is identical to
this tensor, except for these ten numbers here, which I've replaced with zeros.
But unfortunately that is just not going to work.
Here you can also see I'm getting a handle from this hook function because yeah I'm going to want to
remove this so it doesn't continue causing problems in the next demos.
Okay.
So model dot transformer dot h for the hidden layer.
And then in attention C attention and then register forward hook.
Uh, by the way, I don't remember if I have mentioned this before in the course, but there's also
a register backward hook that is something that gets calculated or implemented when the model is doing
backprop back propagation.
But we are not doing backpropagation here.
We are doing forward pass.
So that's why we use the forward hook.
The backward hook would be something that uh, yeah, if you want to manipulate some activations while
the model is being trained.
Range.
So far, so good.
And, uh.
Oh, here we get a problem.
I'll put zero of slice backwards is a view and is being modified in place.
So PyTorch does not like that.
Okay, fine.
Remove that handle.
And now here we are with demo two.
So now I'm just index accessing this matrix directly I'm not creating a separate view a separate slice
of the matrix that is linked.
And then modifying that instead I'm just modifying this tensor directly.
If you find the difference between this code and this code to be confusing, I'm on your side on this.
I also find this to be quite confusing that this doesn't work.
But anyway, that's that's just how it is.
Uh, so this works.
It's all fine.
The one thing that is potentially a little bit confusing is that this is just.
Q if you wanted to access, let's say, the first ten, uh, vectors in k, then what you would need
to do is write 768 to 768 plus ten and Y7 68.
That is the embeddings dimension of GPT two small.
So therefore this is the end of the Q matrix and the start of the k matrix.
And then this would be the k matrix plus ten obviously.
Yeah.
In practice you should not be hard coding things like this.
But it's just for demonstration.
Okay then.
Otherwise the rest of this code is the same.
I'm implanting this hook back into the attention block here.
We can run the model through and confirm that we have really cached these activation values.
And now here I'm just highlighting the first ten.
And you see indeed that there are zero over here.
So there's only one row in which these are zero.
And then again I remove that hook.
And now for demo three.
Okay So here this is now slightly different.
This is an adaptation of demo one here.
I'm still splitting up the matrices.
This is useful because it makes it easier to, uh, to access one of these three matrices.
The difference here is I'm first making a copy.
So this is not explicitly attached to this tensor, but instead is its own unique copy.
And now I'm modifying this in place.
And then I'm concatenating them back.
And then it turns out that PyTorch is completely fine with that.
And here we see again that the first element in the sequence, the fourth token.
And I'm printing out all of the embeddings vectors for qkv.
And we see that they start with zeros because that's what I manipulated okay.
Also remove that hook.
So now what I'm doing is adding a little bit more sophistication.
So the idea here is that I want to implant this hook into all of the transformer blocks, because I
want to get the Q activations or whatever activations we want from every single block, from all the
transformer layers.
But I only want to manipulate.
I only want to change the activations from one of those layers.
So very easy to do.
You just add an if statement and you say if layer number equals three, then you do this and otherwise.
So for every other layer this code does not get run.
And then all we do is store the activations.
We still want this return statement here, but this output is not modified unless the layer number equals
three.
Okay.
So now yeah.
Then here I'm just showing you that I've organized these handles into a list.
So I initialize handles as an empty list.
And then I keep appending it.
So now we get all of these hooks one for each transformer block.
And then here again I'm just printing out some of these activations just so you can see that they really
do turn into zeros.
Okay.
And then here I'm removing all of them.
Now we get to demo five here.
The main addition compared to the previous demo is that I am defining the vector that I want to use
to replace this.
I'm not hard coding it in here inside the hook function.
Instead, I am defining this variable outside of the hook function so that I can later modify this during
an experiment.
Okay?
Otherwise, this is very similar to the fourth one okay.
So now yeah we see we get lots of zeros there.
And now here I'm overwriting this variable.
So this variable was called Q to replace here it's called q to replace.
And now here I'm setting q to replace be linearly spaced numbers.
So instead of zeros this is going to be just linearly spaced numbers from minus one up to 0.7.
Okay.
And then finally demo six.
And that is kind of the most flexible.
We are still going to develop slightly more sophisticated versions of the hook functions and interacting
with the model as it's doing a forward pass.
But that will come later.
But this is certainly the most sophisticated and dynamic and flexible way of hooking into a function
and manipulating its activations that I've shown so far.
Okay.
So we get a dictionary where the keys are numbers.
These are integers.
These will correspond to the layered numbers.
And then the values associated with each of these keys corresponds to the activations that I want to
replace.
Okay.
So now here we say if the layer number.
So if the layer number that we're currently working in as we're going through the activations in the
model, if that is a member of the keys.
So in this case, if it's either a three or an eight, then we grab the activations from here.
So either zeros or integers going up to five.
That becomes the new data.
And then I'm replacing that at the beginning of q the q activations for token number four.
Again this is still more hard coding inside the hook function than you would typically want to have,
but that's fine.
I'm just trying to demo how these work.
Okay, if if this is false, then that means we're on, you know, layer seven or whatever.
Then nothing gets changed, but we still save the output.
Okay.
So then I implant that into all of the layers.
And now here you can see that we get.
So let's see we have modified from layer three.
That's all zeros.
And we modified from layer eight.
That is just the numbers zero.
The integers zero through four.
And this is where we get back to the regular activations that are calculated endogenously by the model.
So I did not actually change any of these values I only changed the first five values okay.
So now here I am replacing or sorry deleting key eight and adding another replacement in 11.
So eight three is preserved.
That's still all zeros.
And now I'm setting 11 to be 123.
And now run some more tokens again.
And now we see.
So three is still the zeros.
And now layer eight is go has gone back to what it should be without any manipulations.
So this is all the natural activity that is being calculated by the model.
It's not at all affected by the previous manipulation, because I have specifically deleted it from
that dictionary, and instead now we get a manipulation of the final transformer block.
And that's just the numbers one, two, three.
Okay.
And then I remove all of those handles, although this is the end of the script.
So I don't actually need to do that.
And here yeah I'm just printing out the, the keys and the values that I am manipulating in this experiment.
As I mentioned in the previous video, doing interventional or causal mechanistic interpretability research
is simultaneously easy and difficult.
The coding part is easy, as you've now seen in this video.
There are a few additional considerations and some tricks and other things to know about when coding
forward pass manipulations, but that's relatively easy compared to all of the amazing things that you've
learned so far in this course.
That said, one tricky thing about writing these kinds of hooks is that you cannot interact with the
functions or the data in the middle of a forward pass.
So I definitely recommend incorporating print statements into your hooks while you are first writing
your code and doing lots of sanity checking about matrix sizes and the hooked values.
Even if you're not planning on replacing the actual activations with zeros, it's still a good idea
to actually replace with zeros when writing your code initially, just to make it easier to check that
your code is doing what you want it to do, where you want it to be doing it.
Anyway, I hope you found this video insightful.
In the next video, you will have the opportunity to continue learning about using hooks to manipulate
activations during inference.